# Julia DMRG and Quantum Chemistry Experiments

This project contains a Julia implementation of the DMRG
(Density Matrix Renormalization Group) algorithm and some miscellaneous
Julia experiments. The experiments were used during the development of the
DMRG code, and to explore the structure the molecular hamiltonian matrix.

The DMRG implementation exactly follows the algorithm presented in
Schollwöck's paper, *The density-matrix renormalization group in the age
of matrix product states*:

    https://arxiv.org/abs/1008.3477

The code is organized into several directories:

1. `dmrg`: contains all the DMRG code

1. `experiments`: contains various Julia experiments

1. `itensor`: ITensor examples

1. `lapack`: contains an example of how to call a ScaLAPACK function
from Julia `(qrcp.jl)`. The example specifically calls the ScaLAPACK function
`dlaqps().`

1. `operator_mpo`: contains an MPO implementation that follows Snajberk's
paper (https://edoc.ub.uni-muenchen.de/21974/1/Snajberg_Philipp.pdf). This was
initially developed to generate MPOs for use with DMRG. However, ITensor's MPO
generation mechanism is vastly superior. The tests contain examples of using both
MPO implementations, however this code doesn't have much value. It's definitely
recommended to generate MPOs using ITensor.

## Julia Version

This code has been tested with Julia Version 1.6.0 on macOS:

    Julia Version 1.6.0
    Commit f9720dc2eb (2021-03-24 12:55 UTC)
    Platform Info:
        OS: macOS (x86_64-apple-darwin19.6.0)
        CPU: Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-4960HQ CPU @ 2.60GHz
        WORD_SIZE: 64
        LIBM: libopenlibm
        LLVM: libLLVM-11.0.1 (ORCJIT, haswell)

## Slow Julia Package Loading

Julia packages have notoriously long load times. This code uses some fairly
heavy packages and so, not surprisingly, the initial startup time is very
long. There are some ways to reduce this initial load time.

### ITensor

For ITensor specifically, one can use its `compile()` function:

    using ITensors
    ITensors.compile()

For more details see section 2.7 of https://arxiv.org/pdf/2007.14822.pdf.

### PackageCompiler

A more general solution is to use PackageCompiler. This can speed up loading
of any package. The only penalty is that one needs to rerun the compilation
to upgrade the package to a new version.

See https://julialang.github.io/PackageCompiler.jl/dev for details.

## Julia Packages

To install the Julia packages required by the DMRG code and its associated tests,
execute the following commands from the Julia REPL:
```
import Pkg
Pkg.add("TensorOperations")
Pkg.add("KrylovKit")
Pkg.add("ITensors")
```

The Snajberk-based MPO code requires some additional packages:
```
import Pkg
Pkg.add("SymPy")
Pkg.add("Parameters")
```

To directly compute the molecular hamiltonian matrix and
compute its eigenvalue decomposition, install `Arpack.`
```
import Pkg
Pkg.add("Arpack")
```

## DMRG Execution

The following code runs DMRG on a Heisenberg spin chain containing
2 spins (sites):

    include("src/dmrg/dmrg.jl")
    mpo = MPO(create_heisenberg_mpo(2))
    mps = MPS(randn(2, 2))
    energy = compute_ground_state!(mpo, mps)

The test `test_dmrg.jl` contains some good examples of DMRG execution on
a few different types of systems. From the root directory of the project run

    julia
    include("test/dmrg/test_dmrg.jl")    

Execution time for this test is pretty long. It's partially due to package
loading. The bulk of the time is spent computing the ground state of a
water molecule.

## ITensor

The Julia version of ITensor (https://github.com/ITensor/ITensors.jl)
provides a well optimized implementation of the DMRG algorithm.

The file `itensor_utils.jl` provides some convenience methods for
the execution of DMRG with ITensor. Note also that the examples and
tests in this project use ITensor to generate MPOs. For example,

    h,v = read_electron_integral_tensors("data/h2/h2.ezfio.FCIDUMP")
    energy,state = molecular_dmrg(h, v)
    nuclear_repulsion_energy = 0.71510433908108118
    total_energy = energy + nuclear_repulsion_energy
    @test isapprox(total_energy, -1.1372838344894254, atol=0.00000001)

As noted above, this project contains code `(OperatorMPO)` that generates MPOs
using the Snajberk-based construction. However, this code is effectively worthless.
The ITensor `AutoMPO` method is vastly superior.

## One-Electron and Two-Electron Tensor Data

### FCIDUMP

The file `fcicump.jl` provides a function to read one-electron and two-electron
tensor from an FCIDUMP file:

    read_electron_integral_tensors(fcidump_filename::String)

This code was specifically written to read FCIDUMP files generated by
Quantum Package (https://quantumpackage.github.io/qp2).

Note that the two-electron is permuted at the end of the function:

    two_electron_integral_tensor = permutedims(two_electron_integral_tensor, [3,2,1,4])

It's not clear why this permutation is necessary - and it may be possible that it's
actually not necessary. However, quantum chemistry calculations using the non-permuted
two-electron tensor seem to be incorrect. Additionally, the datasets at Quantaggle
(https://github.com/qulacs/Quantaggle_dataset/tree/master/datasets/Small_Molecules_1)
don't require this permutation.

One logical explanation is that the difference is due to the ordering of
the orbitals. However, if that's the case, then the ground state energy should
be the same regardless of the permutation of orbitals. So the problem seems to lie
elsewhere.

Note that the hydrogen and water molecule calculations provided in this project
use the permuted two-electron tensor. And the results are correct - at least as far
as the author can tell.

In any case, there's some weirdness somewhere. So if you use this function for
molecules other than hydrogen and water, be sure to consult with a chemist
regarding this little mystery.

### Quantaggle

As noted above Quantaggle provides quantum chemistry data:

    https://github.com/qulacs/Quantaggle_dataset/tree/master/datasets/Small_Molecules_1

The data is conveniently stored in HDF5 format. The code below reads the
one-electron and two-electron tensors (and full configuration interaction Energy)
for a water molecule. First install the `HDF5` package:

    import Pkg
    Pkg.add("HDF5")

And then:

    using HDF5
    io = h5open("data/h2o/H2O_sto-3g_singlet_0.96_104.5deg_0.96.hdf5", "r")
    data = read(io)
    one_electron_tensor = data["one_body_integrals"]
    two_electron_tensor = data["two_body_integrals"]
    fci_energy = data["fci_energy"]

As also noted above, there's some confusion - for the author - regarding the correct
representation of the two-electron tensor. In the case of Quantaggle, it's not clear
if the two-electron tensor is stored in row-major or column-major format. And, given
the symmetries of this tensor, it's hard to figure out which data storage format
is being used.

In any case, as previously stated, there's some weirdness somewhere. So if you
use this data for molecules other than hydrogen and water, be sure to consult with
a chemist regarding this other little mystery.

## Direct Hamiltonian Matrix Calculation

The file `molecular_hamiltonian_matrix.jl` contains functions to directly
generate the molecular hamiltonian matrix for any (not too large) molecule.
The matrix is computed by directly evaluating the second quantization
expression given arbitrary one-electron and two-electron tensors.

The hamiltonian matrix is stored in sparse format, and it's eigenvalue
decomposition can be readily computed using `Arpack.`

For example, after installing Arpack:

    import Arpack
    include("src/experiments/molecules/molecular_hamiltonian_matrix.jl")
    
    h,v = read_electron_integral_tensors("data/h2/h2.ezfio.FCIDUMP")
    hamiltonian = molecular_hamiltonian_matrix(h, v)

    # add nuclear repulsion part to hamiltonian
    m_qp_full = m_qp + (I(16) * 0.71510433908108118)
    
    eigenvalues,eigenvectors = Arpack.eigs(hamiltonian)
    @test isapprox(eigenvalues[1], -1.1372838344894252, atol=0.0000001)

Note also that the computation of the hamiltonian matrix is optionally
multithreaded. To exploit this, simply launch Julia with several threads.
For example,

    julia --threads 4

### Matrix and MPO for Hydrogen Molecule

The file `data/h2/h2_matrix_and_mpo.jl` contains the hamiltonian for a
hydrogen molecule, both in matrix format and MPO format.

This data is generated as follows:

    h,v = read_electron_integral_tensors("data/h2/h2.ezfio.FCIDUMP")

    h2_matrix = molecular_hamiltonian_matrix(h, v)
    
    sites = ITensors.siteinds("Electron", 2)
    one_electron_itensor_mpo = create_one_electron_mpo(sites, h)
    two_electron_itensor_mpo = create_two_electron_mpo(sites, v)
    one_electron_mpo = MPO(one_electron_itensor_mpo)
    two_electron_mpo = MPO(two_electron_itensor_mpo)
    h2_mpo = one_electron_mpo + two_electron_mpo


